# What is this?!

Our directory structure looks like:

```
├── README.md
├── brunch-config.js
├── dist
├── elm-package.json
├── elm-stuff
├── node_modules
├── package.json
└── src
```

Our `src` directory is where our source Elm code is going to live. Our `dist` is where the index.html, app.js, and styles.css files live and where the compiled Elm code is going to go. `brunch-config.js` is the config file for our brunch builds. `elm-stuff` is the downloaded elm packages for our project to use. Lets take closer looks at the `elm-package.json` file really quick.


```
{
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "summary": "helpful summary of your project, less than 80 characters",
    "repository": "https://github.com/user/project.git",
    "license": "BSD3",
    "source-directories": [
        "."
    ],
    "exposed-modules": [],
    "dependencies": {
        "elm-lang/core": "4.0.1 <= v < 5.0.0",
        "elm-lang/html": "1.1.0 <= v < 2.0.0"
    },
    "elm-version": "0.17.0 <= v < 0.18.0"
}
```
Most this stuff is just filler, but two things we are going going to talk about:

## Source Directories

This field in the file is to indicate where our source Elm code lives. This field tells the import statement about the directory structure so it knows how to find everything when we go to compile (or when brunch does that for us). Our Elm code is going to live in `src` so we need to update that field.


```
{
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "summary": "helpful summary of your project, less than 80 characters",
    "repository": "https://github.com/user/project.git",
    "license": "BSD3",
    "source-directories": [
        "./src"
    ],
    "exposed-modules": [],
    "dependencies": {
        "elm-lang/core": "4.0.1 <= v < 5.0.0",
        "elm-lang/html": "1.1.0 <= v < 2.0.0"
    },
    "elm-version": "0.17.0 <= v < 0.18.0"
}
```


## Dependencies

This field is the field where our dependencies are declared. If you look you can see that `core` and `html` are part of this list. `core` is the core language functions and modules that we are going to be using. Every Elm project will need this as a dependency. And `html` is the `Html` package that we used in section 3. As we add more dependencies a little later you will see the use the the `elm-package` cli and how it updates your `elm-package.json` file (without any flags).

Lets run this thing and see where it is at. You will need two terminal tabs open:

Tab 1:

```
npm run build
```

Tab 2:

```
npm run server
```

The build will set up watchers on our Elm files so when we make changes those changes will be compiled to our `dist` directory. The server will run a local server at: localhost:3000.




