# Basics

Here we begin our journey with going over some basics of the Elm language and the some of tool that are available to us as we learn and develop with Elm.

## Elm Repl

The Elm platform comes with a repl much like many other languages do. However, Elm is a newer language and repl is still a work in progress so remember that as you use it. Maybe you can even help make it better by making pull requests!

So in your terminal, after you have the Elm platform installed, type:

```
$ elm-repl
```

and you should get:

```
---- elm repl 0.17.0 -----------------------------------------------------------
 :help for help, :exit to exit, more at <https://github.com/elm-lang/elm-repl>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
>
```

If so you have made it into the elm-repl successfully, congratulations!

## Pythagoras Loves Elm Too!

Most docs and language tutorials show you the math operators first, so to follow suite will do the same here.

```
> 1 + 1
2 : number

> 1 - 1
0 : number

> 1 * 1
1 : number

> 3 ^ 2
9 : number

> 1 / 2
0.5 Float

> 1 // 2
0 : Int

> 10 // 5
2 // Int

> 7 % 2
1 : Int

```

There more math operators, but it would be best to leave those for some other time. Elm is a typed language so you see the output type on the right side of the `:` in the repl. The colon normal is read out loud as "has type of." For example, `0 : Int` would be "Zero has type of Int." If this feels strange to you right now do not worry, Elm's type system, once understood, is part of the joyful developer experience of writing Elm as I hope you will see. Also, types will get their own section do to their importantance in the language.



## You Cannot Handle The Truth!

As in any other lanague Elm has a Boolean type. However, it will be used and understood a little differently then normal once we get into types, but for the most part mentally you can understand them in the same sense as you currently do.

```
> True
True : Bool

> False
False : Bool

```

One thing to note, is `True` and `False` in Elm start with capital letter unlike many other languages. However, there is reason for this and will make sense in due time young padawan.

## George Boole and His Logic

Along with having true and false, Elm gives us ways to operate on them to figure things out.

```
> True == False
False : Bool

> True && True
True : Bool

> True || False
True : Bool

> not False
True : Bool

> not True
False : Bool

> xor True False
True : Bool

```

## Strings and Characters as Presented by Plato

Elm provides a solid and easy what to reason and work with Strings and Characters.

```
> "Plato"
"Plato" : String

> 'p'
'p' : Char

> "Plato's " ++ "forms"
"Plato's forms" : String

```

Some quick notes about strings and chars. Elm has a String and Char module as part of its core package that we can include in our work to do more fancy things with Strings, so do not get too upset if that was not very impressive. Will we see these packages a little later I promise. In JavaScript land most people write strings with single quotes like `'Plato'`, but if you tried to put that in your repl you will get this:

```
> 'Plato'
-- SYNTAX PROBLEM -------------------------------------------- repl-temp-000.elm

I ran into something unexpected when parsing your code!

3|   'Plato'
       ^
I am looking for one of the following things:

    a closing '''
```

The compiler is saying after the `'P'` it is expecting to see a closing `'` because Elm understands Chars and Strings differently. Not to get to far ahead of our selves but String in Elm really is just a List of Chars so `"Plato"` can also be thought of as `[ 'P', 'l', 'a', 't', 'o' ]`. While this is not important right now, it will be later on when we start doing more of the fancy stuff with Strings.

For now that will be our dealings with Strings and Chars, but soon enough we will be a out of the cave and will see them in a more full way (yes there a pun in there).


## Santa's List

One of the most used and important types in Elm is the List. The are every where! Santa's OCD list keeping habit would be more than matched in Elm land. Lets make some Lists!

```
> [1, 2, 3, 4 ]
[1,2,3,4] : List number

```

I want to pause here for a second. There is something new for us to look at namely the type signature `List number`. What that is saying we have a List of numbers. What do you think the type of the next List is?

```
> [ "Plato's", "Cave" ]

```

Well, if I were to tell you right here you would see the answer and would you be learning? I will tell you the answer later.

One thing to note about Lists is they have to contain the same type of value in side them, so you cannot have a List of Strings mixed with Ints. The Elm compiler with throw up on you for trying to do that:

```
> ["Plato", 12]
-- TYPE MISMATCH --------------------------------------------- repl-temp-000.elm

The 1st and 2nd elements are different types of values.

3|   ["Plato", 12]
               ^^
The 1st element has this type:

    String

But the 2nd is:

    number

Hint: All elements should be the same type of value so that we can iterate
through the list without running into unexpected values.

```

Look at that error message, just beautiful! Error messages in Elm are wonderful 99% of the time! This is one of the reasons they can say you will not get any run time errors in your application. We will be making the Lists, but the compiler will check them twice for you! Take that Santa!

I just wanted to touch on the data type here and not go into the details quite yet about working with Lists.


## Tup Who?

The last data type that seems reasonable to cover at this point is the Tuple. It is pronounced Tuple, in case you were wondering. If your background is in JavaScript this will be a new type for you. Other languages like Haskell and Python have these, just to name a few, but for some reason they never made their way into JavaScript land. Here are some:

```
> (12,12)
(12,12) : ( number, number' )

> (12,"adf")
(12,"adf") : ( number, String )

> (12,"adf", 'a')
(12,"adf",'a') : ( number, String, Char )

```

First, a tuple can have *n* amount of items. Second, a tuple can have mixed types. The output `(12, "asdf") : ( number, String )` would read like: "A tuple of 2 elements that have the types number and String." Again, we will cover working with tuples a little later, you just need to be aware of them at this point.


## Conclusion

We have barely touched the surface here, but these are the basic types that most of your Elm work is going to revolve around.



