# Function Basics

Since Elm is a functional language we should expect there to be a lot to say about functions. There is. But I will keep to a minimum. First some functional programing terminology. Functional programming does not have one solid clear definition, and for these reason we are going to talk about aspects of functional programming. To say Elm is a functional programming language is to Elm has the aspects of functional programming. One aspects here is pure functions, where was covered in the introduction of this section. Secondly elm allows for higher-order functions

## Functions of the Highest Order

Higher order functions are functions that take other functions as arguments. For you JavaScript people out there `addEventListeneer` is a high order function:

```
btn.addEventListener("click", () => {
  console.log("CLICK!!!");
});
```

Do you see the second argument there `() => console.log("CLICKED")`? Since `addEventListener` accepts that function as an argument we know it is a higher order function. So, JavaScript people you should feel right at home!

I am introducing this now because it is not really Elm specific (as you can we wrote JS in our example), and the idea crosses over to a lot of languages. Plus we will see this in our Elm code.

## No More () {} ; ,

Lets look at a math function:

```
f(x) = x + 1
```

In English "*f* of *x* equals *x* + 1." Or more simply take x and add one to it. Lets look at this in JavaScript land:

```
function addOne(x) {
  return x + 1;
}

// or

const add = x => x + 1;
```

The ES2016/ES6/ESNext/ESWhateverTomorrowsDateTimeIs add function almost looks like our math function up there. Where the *f* maps to *add*. Now lets look at a function in Elm:

```
add x = x + 1
```

This looks closer to the math function but close enough to the ES2016 add function. Looks like the learning curve thus far is rather small. Lets call our add function first in JS and then again in Elm:

```
add(12);
```

```
add 12
```

Very cool, you just wrote and called your first custom function! What is important here is yes, you are learning a new language **and** functional programing at the same time, but try not to over think it.

What if we wanted our `add` function to take two arguments?! Here is the syntax for that:

```
add x y =
  x + y

-- or

add x y = x + y

```

To add the amount of arguments your function takes you just adding parameters between your function name and your equal sign.

Also note, n Elm there is no return statement. Whatever is the last value of your function is what you return. That can be anything from a number to a function.


## Let There Be a Bindings

In an Elm function some times we need to do some extra operations before returning a value. That is where the `let in` block comes in. You will see this a lot in Elm code. Here is an example, and we will walk through it

```

addOne x =
  let
    x' =
      x + 4
  in
    x' - 3

```

Okay lets walk through this code. You will see that in stead of writing our function body all on one line we went to a new line after the equal signs at the top level. When you do this the next line, in our case the `let`, needs to be indented. White does matter in Elm.

Next, we have our `let in` block. The `let` block allows us to declare bindings local to just to the function body. We can declare endless bindings inside of of the `let` statement.

Inside the `let` statement you see `x'`. What is the back tick you ask? It is just part of the binding name, that is totally legal in Elm and actually normal. Often times you will see a back used when your "reusing" the binding name. Normally, it is meant to express that some operation has/is taken/taking place on the original binding, but the meaning behind the binding remains the same.

Then we see what `x'` is bound to, namely `x + 4`. As an aside I want to point out that Elm does not see `x'` as a variable, but as a function. Everything you see that follows these rough patterns: `f x.. = x` or `f = 1` are functions.

This is followed by the `in` keyword. The `in` keyword marks the end of the bindings to where you are now moving into the function body that actually returns something. Also, your `in` block has full access to the bindings made in the `let` block.

I show you this now because it is common pattern inside of Elm development, and understanding this at basic level is very helpful.

## The Function Who Had No Name

Just like in JavaScript we can have anonymous functions! But we just do not have to deal with that error of `error from anonymous`, thank goodness! Lets compare:

```
(function () {
  return 1 + 1;
})

// or

btn.addEventListener("click", () => alert("I am from an anonymous function!"))

// or

const myFunc = (x) => {
  return x + 1;
}
```

Now in Elm:

```
(\x -> 1 + 1)

-- or

myFunc = (\x -> x + 1)

-- or more than one argument

myFunc = (\x y -> x + y)
```

Lets generalize the pattern: `(\arg1 arg2 ..argN -> function body)`. Really the function arguments (which is called the head of the function) and the function body are split in the middle with the `->` keyword.


## Conclusion

Remember this is primer, we will get to more exciting stuff when we start building things. I am just trying to give you a base starting point to build off of. Next we are moving data types, one of my favorite parts of Elm.

