# Records

One data type we have not really talked about yet is the record. While, they are rather simple and inflexible data structures I did want to give them their own section due to their use some what special in later chapters.

## Objects

No, there are no objects in Elm. Remember just functions and immutable data. However, if you have a JavaScript background you can think of records has highly inflexible object literals. Lets compare:

JavaScript land:

```
const person = {
  name: "Plato",
  job: "Think hard about things most people do not care about"
}
```

Elm land:

```
person =
  { name = "Plato"
  , job = "To think hard about things most people do not care about"
  }
```

As you can see the syntax is rather close. However, lets discuss some of the differences.

### The new line after `=`

In Elm land `person` is really a function that returns that ver specific record. The amazing minds behind Elm have put together a style guide to help keep Elm code constant, and this is one of their recommendations. You could have written this:

```
person = {
  name = "Plato"
, job = "To think hard about things most people do not care about"
}
```

and it would compile and run. However, that would not be considered idiomatic Elm code. It was strange to me at first, as it is to most people when they talk about their experiences learning Elm, but once you get use to I am going to be you will like it better.

### The comma is in the front

Another style guide recommendation and thus idiomatic Elm code. You do not have to put the comma in the front, but you will be going out side the community standard, which who says the community is right? Again, when I, and other people, started writing Elm this felt a bit awkward, but I love it now that I have learned Elm.

### The `=` vs `:`

When assigning a value to property in the record in Elm land you have to use the `=` sign. This will take a little time to adjust, but again I actually like it better than the `:`. Further, not to jump a head to much but `:` has a special meaning in Elm code, so keep that in mind.

## Functional Differences

By functional differences I mean how you work with records and JS object literals is a little different. Some quick ones are:

1. You cannot ask for a field that does not exist.
2. No field will ever be undefined or null.
3. You cannot create recursive records with a this or self keyword.

But lets cover some deeper differences:

For starters, you cannot get the keys from the record. Which is way I call the record inflexible, and can lead to frustrations at first for a JavaScript developer. However, this means you have to be explicit about what information you want from your record, no surprises, no magic. This can lead to more readable and more maintainable code. However, I would be remiss if I did not mention this can lead to code that is a little more verbose.


Secondly, you cannot update a record in place like:

```
person.name = "Socrates"
```

Remember everything is immutable in Elm land and this would break the idea of immutable data. This would also allow for state to exist, and since Elm is a functional language having state is like having a knife stuck in your side.

Thirdly, Elm records once created get a special getter function along with it. Lets type this in our repl. If you do not have the repl up and running run this in your terminal: `elm-repl`

Once in the repl we going to write our record on one line, which is different then who we would write in the source code.

```
person = { name = "Plato", job = "Philosopher" }

.name person
"Plato" : String

```

Since our record has a field named `name`, we can get the value by calling a created function `.name` and passing the record in as an argument. Further, if we had two records with the same field name, Elm would be able to get the correct value for us as we passed them in. For example:

```
person = { name = "Plato", job = "Philosopher" }
dog = { name = "Tucker", job = "Eat & Sleep" }

.name person
"Plato" : String

.name dog
"Tucker" : String
```

Lastly, since we cannot update a record in place this begs the question: "How do we update a record?" Well there is special syntax for that. Type this out in our repl. (You do not need to write out the person record again if you already have done that without stopping your repl)

```
person = { name = "Plato", job = "The best job after programming" }

unemployeedPlato = { person | job = "No job" }

```

Try not to get too caught up on the syntax, lets break it down.

First we have our record person.
Second we have are binding something to a name called `unemployeedPlato`.
Next, we have something called *record update syntax*, or at least that is what I called it.

#### Record Update Syntax

Record Update Syntax can be generalized to this pattern: `{ recordName | fieldToYodate = newValue }`. You can think of a UNIX pipes, where you are piping the record to the updated field. This then returns a new record.

## Functional Similarities

While there is far amount of differences there is still some similarities.

First, dot notation. While Elm does build us a getter function, we are still able to use dot notation to access our field values. For example:

```
person = { name = "Plato" }

person.name
"Plato" : String

```

Second, values can be anything (other than `this` or `self`, those do not exist in Elm land). That is Lists, Arrays, other Records, Dicts (which we have not talked about yet), Tuples, Functions, Maybe (we will cover this a little later), and more.


## Conclusion

This a quick overview of Records. Just think of them as JavaScript objects crazy uncle that never changes.
