# Types

Elm has types, much like everyone other language, however you are not limited to just the types Elm gives you. You can make your own types, which comes in handy when building applications. There are two different ways of defining types. First we will cover `type alias` and then we will talk about `type`.


## Type Alias

Sometimes aliasing a type can be use full for making your code more explicit and self documenting. Further, it helps condense code that involves records. Lets work through some examples by going into our repl.

```
> type alias Name = String

```
Here we just aliasing, or giving String another binding to a type within our program. All types and type alias have to start with a capital letter like `Name`. This would invalid: `type alias name = ...`. While in the repl this might seem a little silly, in real Elm applications type aliasing happens quite often. Lets look at aliasing a record.


```
> type alias Person = { name : String, age : Int }

```
To read this one would say: "Person is a type alias for a record with a field called name witch has type of String, and a field age which has type of Int." Again, you will see type alias for records a lot in Elm code, but you probably will not use them too much in the repl. This just to get you started with some of the syntax and ideas around type aliases.


## Type

Sometimes we need a little more information or direction with our types than what Elm provides us, so we can create our own types. Lets start a new repl session and work through building some types.


```
> type Product = Product
> Product
Product : Repl.Product

```

We now have a `Product` type. Again, at first glance this might not seem very useful in the repl, but we shall soon see the practical implications. So the `Product` type can be more useful. What type of Product is it? We can make something called type parameters to give more information to our types. Lets look at an example:

```
> type Product = Product String
> Product "Updesk"
Product "Updesk" : Repl.Product

```

First lets cover syntax. It is very similar to what we had above for our product type, but this time we told Elm that this type will receive a String when we what to use it. The type `Product String` can be seen as a function in JavaScript that looks like:

```
function Product(name) {
  // function body
}

```
Types work a lot like functions because they are functions in Elm. Remember everything in Elm is either immutable data or functions. We are going to cover some vocab to help illustrate some of these ideas.

### Type Constructor

When we declare a new type we write `type TypeName =`. The `TypeName` here can be called the *Type Constructor*. You will never directly interact with this in code that does stuff, but it used in your type signatures (which we will cover a little later).

### Data Constructor

After the type constructor we have `Type OtherTypes`, which other types can be *n* amount of other types. This is our *Data Constructor*, this is what we actually work with in our functions and code. You can kinda think of Data Constructors has JavaScript function constructors... but not really... since we do not have the idea of classes/objects in Elm land.


In our above Product example we used `Product` has both the Type constructor and Data Constructor, but this does not have to be the case:

```
> type Product = Updesk
> Updesk
Updesk : Repl.Product

```

However if you try to call `Product` now you get:

```
> Product
-- NAMING ERROR ---------------------------------------------- repl-temp-000.elm

Cannot find variable `Product`

7|   Product
     ^^^^^^^
Maybe you want one of the following?

    List.product


```

This is because in our definition: `type Product = Updesk` `Product` is our Type Constructor and `Updesk` is our Data Constructor. This might seem strange but this allows us to build what are called *Union Types*. Lets talk a quick look at what this looks like, and then we will cover the details:


```
> type Product = Updesk | Camelbak
> Updesk
Updesk : Repl.Product
> Camelbak
Camelbak : Repl.Product

```

OK, so we have a newish syntax: `type TypeConstructor = DataConstructor1 | DataConstructor2`. The type can be though as an `or` operator. So a `Product` can be `Updesk` **or** `Cambelbak`. Another way to think of this is we are building an application for a store, and they sell updesks and camelbaks. So, when a product is ordered it can either be a product by updesk or camelbak. We can take this a little further even add Type Parameters to our products to give us more informations:

```
> type Product = Updesk Int | Camelbak Int
> Updesk 12
Updesk 12 : Repl.Product
> Camelbak 15
Camelbak 15 : Repl.Product

```

While `Int` is not very descriptive for us, yet, this shows us that we can have our type carry some information along with it. This allows us to build very a very robust type system that will allow our code to very expressive and easy to follow. One thing seems to be true about my experiences in Elm thus far is the better my types the better my business logic. Lets take our store example a little bit further to include our `type alias` to get clarity in our application and too see how these two concepts can complement each other.


```
> type alias Quant = Int
> type alias Price = Int
> type alias Name = String
> type Product = Updesk Name Quant Price | Camelbak Name Quant Price
> Updesk "Marker" 1 12
Updesk "Marker" 1 12 : Repl.Product
> Camelbak "Water Bottle" 2 50
Camelbak "Water Bottle" 2 50 : Repl.Product

```

Now when read through our code we can explicitly see what the Data Constructors take a type parameters. If we did not use type alias `Updesk` would have looked like: `Updesk String Int Int`. Then we would be left trying to deduce from other parts of our which `Int` was for what. Due to type aliasing we were able to remove a mental complexity in our code! This will lead to a more joyful developer experience and a better time refactoring.

## Conclusion

Types in Elm are a deep topic and can provide a lot of power in our Elm code. With this high level view of types we can move into the next section for building applications in Elm. We will cover a lot more in regards to everything we have covered.
