# Type Signatures

Elm is a strongly typed language, but it gives us type inference. What that means is even if we do not specify our types in our code, Elm will be able to deduce what the types should be. Here we are going to go over type signatures and how to read them. This is one of the areas of Elm that involved a learning curve and probably some time to get use to. Once you get use the type signatures I promise any time you write code in other languages you will miss them dearly. Try not to let the technical aspects of this section make you feel like giving up, El type signatures are going to become your best friend. Just stick with it, and do not let this part of the learning process through you off too much.

## :

Early we had mentioned that the `:` in Elm can be read as: "has type of." So if we were going to have a program that had a function that returned a `String` we would have a type signature for that functions that looks like:

```
name : String
```

In English that is "`name` has type of `String`."

For the sake of repetition:

```
age : Int
```

In English that is "`age` has type of `Int`."

Now `Int` and `String` are types with no type parameters (from last chapter). That is to say they are nullary data constructors, or data constructors that take no arguments. Another one is the `Bool` type:

```
areTypeSignaturesAwesomeYet : Bool
```

In English that is "`areTypeSignaturesAwesomeYet` has type `Bool`."

But there are some data constructors that take arguments, and those arguments happen to be other types. Inception? No yet, but you can actually have recursive data types... but that is a little off subject! Some of the data constructors are: `List`, `Dict`, and `Maybe`. Just to name a few common ones. When writing type signatures for functions that return these types it will look like:

```
peoplesNames : List String
```

English: "`poplesNames` has type of List of `String`"

```
namesToSSN : Dict String Int
```

English: "`namesToSSN` has type of `Dict` (or Dictionary) where the key is a `String` and the value is an `Int`."

```
maybeSomething : Maybe String
```

English: "`maybeSomething` has type of `Maybe` which contains a `String`"

Do not worry about `Dict` and `Maybe` we will get to these in our hands on stuff. What is important here is noticing the translations of the signature to English, and understanding when you look at a type signature in Elm you read the `:` has "has type of" or "has type."


This is great for functions that just return something, but about functions that take arguments? Welcome to `->`.

## `->`

The arrow... at least that is what I call it. We are able to get into the mind bending world of functional programing just for a moment so just bare with me.

### Functions on Functions

In pure functional programming functions only take one argument. So it does not make sense to say there is a function called `add` that takes `x` and `y` and adds them together. However, in functional languages like Elm and Haskell you can do just that but why? There is this idea of *currying* functions. Currying means you can apply the function to one argument at a time, and get a new function along the way until all arguments have been pass into the function. Lets look at add:

```
add x y =
  x + y
```

The reality is more like (kinda):

```
add x =
  (\y -> x + y)
```

Add is a function takes `x` returns a function `y` where then we once we call the new function applying it to `y` it will get evaluated completely. The reason for this in functional programing is lambda calculus... but you do not need to need to know lambda calculus to write functional code (but I must say to understand it will help). That means we can do this:

```
> add1 = add 1
> add1 4
5 : number

```

By default Elm currys everything, so you apply arguments as you need building up new functions and finally applying the final argument to finish the evaluation. We do not need to worry about writing our own curry logic into our functions, Elm does that for us, thank goodness!


It takes time to see the benefit of currying, but once you become more into functional programming and practicing opening your mind to functional programing idioms you will love it and look for ways to use it.

## Back to the `->`

Now that we have covered I hope to try to explain the `->` in type signatures. Lets look at a function called `plusOne`:

```
plusOne x =
  x + 1
```

The type signature of this is: `plusOne : Int -> Int`

The way I read this in English is: "`plusOne` has type of `Int` to `Int`"

Another why might be: "`plusOne` takes an `Int` and returns an `Int`"

Either way works, I have realized more I practice and write functional code more think in the first way. The reason why is a function that maps some input to some output. So, in a way `plusOne` maps the `Int` argument to an `Int` type return value.

What about multiple arguments? Lets look at `add`:

```
add x y =
  x + y
```

The type signature for this is: `add : Int -> Int -> Int`

The two ways of reading:

1. `add` has type of `Int` to `Int` to `Int`
2. `add` takes two `Int`s and returns an `Int`

The last type in the type signature is always going to be the return value type. Everything after the `:` our the types of each argument. Say you had a function with this type signature:

```
someFunc : Int -> String -> List Int -> Bool -> Char -> Int -> Maybe String -> Int

```

While we no very little information about this function, other than it probably needs to be broken down into smaller functions, we can deduce that takes 7 arguments, and returns an `Int`.


## Int to Int

The reason behind saying `Int` to `Int` to `Int` for the add function is because of currying and how the function is really applying itself to the arguments. Lets break it down:

```
add : Int -> Int -> Int
add x y =
  x + y

-- we call our function

add 1 2

-- this happens

(\x -> (\y -> x + y)) 1 2
(\1 -> (\y -> x + y)) 2
(\y -> 1 + y) 2
(\2 -> 1 + y)
1 + 2
3
```

To show the bottom part in type signatures we have this:

```
Int -> Int -> Int // (1 -> 2 -> 3)
Int -> Int // ((1 + 2) -> 3)
Int // (3)
```

The function `add` takes an `Int` and returns a new function `Int -> Int` when when we apply an argument to that function we are left with just `Int`.


## Conclusion

If this section was a little academic for you or scary, that is okay. It look me and probably others some time to get our heads around this concept. Like I said just stick with it, and you soon come to learn love the type signatures, and actually use them as a tool for reading code, reading documentation, and and refactoring.


