# Elm Architecture

In this section we are going to cover the Elm architure. This is were language concepts and theory meets application development.

What if I told you there are only 4 peices (that are more or less part of elm) to building fully functional, error free Elm applications.

No babel plugins/prests. No webpack (although you can use it). No Flux/Redux/Refetch/Re(something new every day). No JSX. No React eslint rules to manage accoss projects. No invarient error. No runtime errors. No eslint. No... you get the point.

## The High Level

Lets do a 30,000 feet high level overview of the 4 peices to an Elm application.

### The Model - Our World

In Elm Architecture we have a model our world. This is called the Model. If you have React background it would be the `this.state` and if you have an Angular back it would be `this.$scope`. This is were we store information about the current state of our application. For example if we had a form we might have a Model that has a field called `isValid`, where we can check to see if the form is valid.

### The View - Our Sight

Now that we have a model our application we need away to see our model or implications of our model. This in Elm Architecture is called the view. This is just function function that takes one argument, the model, and returns some Html. A side note about the Html: the Html in Elm is a virtual DOM just like React, and does the same diffing processes... however it does it faster because of immutable data structures :).

### The Actions - Our Interactions

Once we are able to view our application, we/the user is going to want to do something. That could be clikcig, sorting, filtering, inputs, checkboxes, and the list goes on. You can think of actions as messages that are passed from our user to the html view to our application logic. Kinds like `user "clicks button" -> application "handle click button" -> logic "figure out what to do with click button" -> view "here is what what did, render it"`. Or more simply the user passes messages to our application and we can handle them.

### The Update - Our Logic

We are able to have a model of the application, view the application, and act upon the application, but we are going to reason about the application. This is where the update function comes into play. The update function takes to two arguments: the action/msg and model. From there we are about to ask, "What message is being passed to the application by the user?" Based off of that we can then make updates to our model or run commands which will create other actions. When I say update our model, I really do not mean update. Remember data never changes in Elm land, so thereofore we actually make a new copy of our old model (the one passed into the update function) and merge that with our updates and return a new model of the world.


This is the high level overview to all Elm applications. Having this architecture that is consistent accross Elm applicatoins makes it easy to jump in and develop with very little developer barin processing power going to to figuring out where stuff is and what is talk to what.

Let build something!

