# Getting Set Up

For this small tutorial we are going to use Elm's online editor and compiler before we move into building a local project. Navigate to: [Elm Online Editor](http://elm-lang.org/try). We are gong to build a very, very simple todo list here.

## Get Something Working

Whenever I start a new Elm application (even when I would start a new React component) I would just try to get something on the screen. So our first task is to get some information in the DOM.

All Elm programs start with a `main` function, so lets write some code for that right now.

```
main =

```
If you press the compile button on the editor you will get:

```
-- SYNTAX PROBLEM --------------------------------------------------------------

I ran into something unexpected when parsing your code!

2| main =
         ^
I am looking for one of the following things:

    an expression
    whitespace

```

This error is telling you that your function is not fully declared. The compiler is looking for either one of two things: an express or whitespace which means you moved to the next line to write your code.

### Importing Packages

Inorder to get this to work will need to import some Elm packages. The one we are going to import is the `Html` package, which is used for workig with HTML. So, above your `main` function lets add that import:

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
```

That is what your code show look like now. Lets cover some of the syntax really quick.
The pattern we used here can be generalized to this: `import PackageName expsosing (functionNames or ..)`. There are more patterns but we cover those when needed, lets just foucs on this one as it is very common.

`import` is the keyword to let Elm know that we are wanting some functions or data types from an Elm file outside our current file. Next we have `PackageName`, which is the name of the package you want, in our case it is `Html`. Next the keyword `exposing` which tells the Elm compiler that we are going to expose some (or all) the public functions in the page. Lastly, we have `(..)` which means all. We could have dones this `(div)` which means we only want the `div` function from package. When working in a larger application I tend to specificy my functions I want, but when I work on a smaller example in try elm, I just exposing all of `Html`'s functions.

### Talking to the DOM

Ok, so how do we get something to screen because just importing `Html` does not do that for us. There really is 0 magic in Elm land. Remeber in Elm everything has a input and output type, and the `main` function is no different. The output type for `main` has to be a type of something that can be rendered on the screen. In Elm those types are: `Html`, `Svg`, or `Program`. Actual lets just return a `Int` in main so you can see the error message:

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  21
```

Which should lead you to this:

```

-- BAD MAIN TYPE ---------------------------------------------------------------

The `main` value has an unsupported type.

4| main =
   ^^^^
I need Html, Svg, or a Program so I have something to render on screen, but you
gave me:

    number


```

Thank you Elm for you befutiful error messges.

For our purposes here we are going to focus on rendering the `Html` type. There is a function in the `Html` package called `text`. This is the simplist building block for rendering `Html` in Elm. If you plan on ever rendering any HTML via Elm, you will use this function. So lets implement it and talk about it.

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  text "Hello World!"

```

If you hit the compile button you should see "Hello World!" printed out on the left side! Very cool, you are writing Elm that talks to the DOM.

#### The `text` Function

The `text` function is given to use from the `Html` package. This function takes one parameter witch is the type `String`. If you were to replace our example's `"Hello World!"` with the number 12 this is the error message you will get:

```
-- TYPE MISMATCH ---------------------------------------------------------------

The argument to function `text` is causing a mismatch.

5|   text 12
          ^^
Function `text` is expecting the argument to be:

    String

But it is:

    number
```

A type mismatch error is going to be a common error you will see, but Elm's error message are really helpful if we just read what it says.

After being supplied the correct type, which is `String`, Elm is going to use that to render a `Text` node into the dom. Behind the sceens the `Html` package is using a vritual DOM muhc like React does, but for practial purposes for use main equal to the React component `render` method.

This gets us set up to really start implementing the Elm archtecture peice by peice.


