# The View

Oddly enough I have found it easiest to start with some parts of a view before trying to model the application with a model. The reason why is at this point in building the application we really do not have know all the pieces to the model, and we can keep the view small and easy to work with, only adding it to as we move along.

## The view function

Here were going to build a `view` function. It is called the `view` function by us, so we an call it anything, but `view` is the idiomatic Elm way. Also, once we starting bringing everthing together calling the view something else will not make much sense and just add an extra layer of complexity and mental overhead to our application. Whcih is Elm land is not considered best practice.


Lets start simple. Lets build a `view` function that is going to give us some `Html`, speicfically a `div` wrapping an `h1` with the title of our app.


```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view

view =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]
```

Ok, we made big jump here so we are going to review this:

### What happend in the main function?

We changed our main function to just have `view` in it. Three things to point out here. One, the order in which functions are made and are called does not matter. We could have the function delcartion for `view` above `main`, but it seems that most Elm apps start with `main` as the first function. Two, in side of main we are actually calling the `view` function. It would be just like doing this in JavaScript:

```
function main() {
  view();
}
```

Just with no parenthesis and semicolons, or the `function` keyword.

### Div Box Box?

All functions from the `Html` pakcage take two arguments that both happen to be list. When generalize this pattern to be: `someHtmlFunc [] []` All I did was just move the lists on different lines. You can see this pattern when we use the `h1` function.

The frist list is a list of `Html.Attributes` so `class`, `style`, `href`, `src`, `placehodler`, `onClick`, and so forth.

The second ist is a list of `Html.Html` so `div`, `h1`, `p`, `a`, `section`, `ul`, `li`, and so forth.

There you have it our basic view!


