# The Model - Our World

The model is the srouce of turth of our application. If the model says `formInvalid` is equal to true, the our form in our application is invalid. All information passes through and out of the model. It is the basic construct of our application. But how do we make a model, and how do we allow our view to get information to render it to the DOM so our users can see it and interact with it.


## Adding Our Model

Last section we left our program looking like:

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view

view =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]
```

We are going to add our model, but before we do that lets review records and type aliases really quick.

### Records

A record is a lightweight labeled data structure. Records have keys and values and we can access values via to notation or the special getter function:

```
person =
  { name = "Plato"
  , jobs = ["thinker", "troll"]
  }

```

We can get `name` from our person record like:

```
person.name

-- or

.name person
```

### Type Alias

Type aliases are way to declare new types that just reference built in types.

```
type alias Name = String

type alias Jobs = List String

type alias Age = Int

-- We type alias a record like so:

type alias Person =
  { name : "Sansa"
  , jobs : [ "Lady of Winterfell", "Strong female lead"]
  , age : 18
  }

```

The record type alias can be read like this: The person record has 3 fields, name which has type of `String`, jobs which has type of `List String`, and age which has type of `Int`. What this allows us to do with records is put them in our type signatures like so:

```
getNameAndAge : Person -> String
getNameAndAGe person =
  "Hello, " ++ person.name ++ " you are " ++ (toString person.age) ++ " years old."

```

Armed with this knowledge we can then buld our model!

We are going to make a type alias for the type `Model` which is just record that will hold our todos to start with.

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view

type alias Model =
  { todos : List String
  }

view =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]

```

Now that we have a type alias for our model, lets make a new function that gives us a base model to work with. The Elm convention here is to call this function `init` because it is the initial state of our application.

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view

type alias Model =
  { todos : List String
  }

init : Model
init =
  { todos = [ "Add some todos" ]
  }

view =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]

```

Here we have added the function `init` plus it has a type signature. The type signature can reads as follows: `init` has type of `Model`. Which means the `init` function is just going to return a new model, and the new model will have the fields and types found in our type alias for `Model`.

Now lets refactor our `view` function to take the model as a parameter and return us some `Html`


```
view : Model -> Html msg
view model =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]
```

Will we talk about the `Html msg` part in second, but first try to compile your new code. You should get this:

```
-- BAD MAIN TYPE ---------------------------------------------------------------

The `main` value has an unsupported type.

4| main =
   ^^^^
I need Html, Svg, or a Program so I have something to render on screen, but you
gave me:

    Model -> Html a

```

The reason for this error is becasue our `view` in side of our main just returns a function that is waiting to take some argument. So lets provide that argument to our function call inside of main, which is going to be our `init` function. Yes we are passing functions to functions, but we do this in JavaScript anyways.


```
main =
  view init
```

so our whole program looks like:

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view init

type alias Model =
  { todos : List String
  }

init : Model
init =
  { todos = [ "Add some todos" ]
  }

view : Model -> Html msg
view model =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]
```

Remeber order does not matter, and often times your will see `main` at the top.


### Html msg

Remember the type section where we talked about type parameters. Something like `List String` where `String` is an argumenent given to the type constructor `List`. Here we are giving the `List` a concrete type of `String`. Hwoever, sometimes we want to be more general can say we want a `List` of any type. For this reason we have what are called *type varabiles* in Elm. They are just a/some lower case letter/letters to show we really do not care what the type is that is passed to our data constructor. Lets look at an example in the repl:

```
> anyList x = [x]
<function> : a -> List a

```
The type signature for `anyList` is `a -> List a`. If we were to call this with say `12` as the argument this is what we will get:

```
> anyList 12
[12] : List number

```

or with the arugment "bob":

```
> anyList "bob"
["bob"] : List String

```

This allows us to build more flexible functions around our types as needed.

For us with `Html msg`, we could rewrite this to say `Html a`. The type varible name does not really matter. So this is saying `Html` of some type. Normally you will see `msg` here because in the Elm Archtecture your `Html` will be passing message around to our future `update` function. If this does not make sense yet, it will a little more once we get to `update`. But we move on to `update` though, lets get our `view` to display our todos.


## Displaying Todos

So are view now takes a `model` and does nothing with it. We also know our `model` is a record with a field named todos, which is a `List` full of `Strings`. Lets add a helper function called `renderTodo` that will take a todo and give us back some `Html msg`.


```

renderTodo : String -> Html msg
renderTodo todo =
  p
    []
    [ text todo ]

```


So our full code looks like:

```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view init

type alias Model =
  { todos : List String
  }

init : Model
init =
  { todos = [ "Add some todos" ]
  }

view : Model -> Html msg
view model =
  div
    []
    [ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ]
    ]



renderTodo : String -> Html msg
renderTodo todo =
  p
    []
    [ text todo ]

```


We know that tod is of type `String` because it is coming from our todos field in our model, which is `List String`. The `String` part of our list is the todo.


What are going to do next is map over our todo list and pass each todo into our `renderTodo` function. If you have any experince with lodash, underscore, or ramda from JavaScript land this should be pretty straight forward. However, Elm takes the appoarch of function first data last while underscore and non lodash/fp take the data first function last appoarch. This is what I mean:

```
// data-first-function-last (DFFL)
_.map(data, function)

// function-first-data-last (FFDL)
_.map(function, data)

```
The FFDL appoarch has some benefits to the functional appoarch that we will explore latter that have to do with currying and function composition. In Elm we have a `List` package that is in the runtime by default, so we do not need to import it. This gives us tons of functions to apply to lists. Naturally, there is the `List.map` function. This function type signature is:

```
List.map : (a -> b) -> List a -> List b

```

In English:

1. `List.map` has type of a function that takes some type (a) and returns some type (b) to `List` of some type (a) to `List` of some type (b)
2. `Lis.map`'s arguments are a function and a list, and returns a new list with the function applied to the values in the orginal list.


For example:

```
> List.map (\x -> x + 1) [1,2,3]
[2,3,4] : List number

```

Lets use this on our `model.todos` but instead of the anyonmous function as the frist argument we are going to use our `renderTodo` function.


```
view : Model -> Html msg
view model =
  div
    []
    ([ h1
        []
        [ text "Todo List" ] ]
        ++ (List.map renderTodo model.todos))

```

Okay some strangeness here right? Rememer that all `Html` functions take two lists so the generalized pattern is `funcForHtml listsOfAttrs listOfHtml`. so the `div []` part is just like we had. The new part is:

```
([ h1
    []
    [ text "Todo List" ] ]
    ++ (List.map renderTodo model.todos))
```

### ++ function

The `++` you see there is a function that combiles two appenedable things, where are lists, strings, and text. We see it in our in what is called the `infix` position, that is it being useed inbetween its two arguments. However, you can call this function like this too:

```
> (++) [1] [2]
[1,2] : List number

```
For our example we then have this:

```
[ h1 [] [ text "Todo List" ] ] ++ (List.map renderTodo model.todos)
```

Which is saying take the list with the h1 inside of it and append the result (which is a list) of the `map` function to that existing list.


So our whole code looks like:


```
import Html exposing (..)

main =
  view init

type alias Model =
  { todos : List String
  }

init : Model
init =
  { todos = [ "Add some todos" ]
  }

view : Model -> Html msg
view model =
  div
    []
    ([ h1
        []
        [ text "Todo List" ] ]
        ++ (List.map renderTodo model.todos))



renderTodo : String -> Html msg
renderTodo todo =
  p
    []
    [ text todo ]

```




